+++
title = "The Analogies & Kant's Defense of Causation"
publishDate = 2020-08-18T00:00:00-04:00
tags = ["categories", "causation", "time", "hume", "skepticism"]
draft = false
weight = 0
toc = true
type = "post"
+++

## The Analogies

Kant entitles the section of the System of All Principles discussing the
relational categories the "Analogies of Experience." Kant discusses the
category of *cause* in the second of his three 'Analogies'. The
Analogies are part of the 'Analytic of Principles' in which Kant
discusses each of the twelve categories and their relation to the
objects of experience at much greater length than he does in the
argument of the Transcendental Deduction, where he is concerned with the
categories' general relation to objects of experience. Before we go on
to discuss Kant's view of causality in detail let's start with a few
background issues. First, what does Kant mean here by an "analogy"?

Kant distinguishes between analogy in mathematics and analogy in
philosophy (B221) and defines analogy in philosophy as

> not the identity of two **quantitative** \[relations, as in
> mathematical analogy\] but [the identity] of two **qualitative**
> relations, where from three given members I can cognize and give *a
> priori* only the **relation** to a fourth member but not **this**
> fourth **member** itself, although I have a rule for seeking it in
> experience and a mark for discovering it there (B222)

It is not clear from this remark what the fundamental difference is
between mathematical and philosophical analogy.[^fn:1] He goes on to say
that

> An analogy of experience will therefore be only a rule in accordance
> with which unity of experience is to arise from perceptions (not as a
> perception itself, as empirical intuition in general), and as a
> principle it will not be valid of the objects (of the appearances)
> **constitutively** but merely **regulatively**. (B222)

Though Kant's position here is complicated, and interpretations
contested, at least this much is clear. First, the paragraph immediately
above points out that the relational categories are not constitutive of
appearances, intuition, or the perception thereof. That is, they are not
the conditions of the possibility of such representations. Instead they
are constitutive only of experience, insofar as it can be constructed
from the connected series of intuitions in a perception. Second, that
there is supposed to be a general structure to the analogies such that a
is to b as c is to *x*, where *x* is that which is to be sought in an
experience.

Fortunately, for our purposes, we need not have an exact conception of
what an analogy is to appreciate the basic points of his argument in the
Second Analogy. But we do need to understand the exact relation between
the category <cause-effect> and the representation of time.

Kant distinguishes three different kinds of temporality (B219):
persistence, succession, and simultaneity. He then claims that each kind
of temporality is connected with each of the relational categories
(i.e. persistence with <substance-inherence>, succession with
<cause-effect>, and simultaneity with <community>).

Kant therefore prefaces his discussion of the three Analogies of
Experience with a single principle, which, in the first edition, reads:
"As regards their existence, all appearances stand a priori under rules
of the determination of their relation to each other in one time" (A176)
and in the second, reads: "Experience is possible only through the
representation of a necessary connection of perceptions" (B218). The
basic idea here is that each of the three relational categories
represents a necessary connection that is required for the possibility
of *experience* (not intuition or perception!) of (i) a single time and
(ii) of objects existing and being temporally related to each other
within a single time.

Two further points of background are worth discussing before proceeding
to the Second Analogy itself. First, Kant denies that we can perceive
time itself (B219), which is to say that Kant denies that we have
conscious awareness of *time*, as opposed to the persistence,
succession, or simultaneity of representations that occur *in* time.

Second, Kant assumes a distinction between an objective temporal order
between states of objects (and between objects) and the subjective
temporal appearance of such order, construed merely as the subjective
succession of representations in a particular empirical mind. Much of
Kant's discussion is then aimed at answering the question "how do I
manage to cognize and know anything about an objective temporal order if
all I have access to is the subjective temporal succession of my own
representations?"

## The Second Analogy

The Second Analogy concerns the *cause-effect* relation. The
"unschematized" (i.e. the "pure" and non-temporal) version of the
category says that given the existence of some ground, its consequence
necessarily exists. But this says nothing further about the relata, the
relation between ground and consequence, or the nature of the relation
of necessity that holds between them. In the Second Analogy we see the
schematized version of the category, and thus the elaboration of the
necessary relation as a *temporal* one. He states this as follows:

> All alterations occur in accordance with the law of the connection of
> cause and effect (B232)

In other words, all alterations occur lawfully, such that all
alterations occur due to causes from which they necessarily follow.

What is an "alteration"? Kant says that "the concept of alteration
presupposes one and the same subject as existing with two opposed
determinations, and thus as persisting" (B233). This indicates that Kant
is primarily concerned with a change of state in a substance. An
alteration is the change of a substance from one state (or the
possession of a property) to another, e.g. from hot to cold, thin to
fat, black to white, etc. Kant thus seeks to validate the principle that
there can be no alteration in a substance that is not due to some cause.

Kant conceives of all change in terms of alteration. So the Second
Analogy ends up being an argument concerned with our ability to cognize
change with respect to the objects of experience. Kant's view is that
all change with respect to such objects must be understood temporally,
and as requiring that the change be the effect of some cause.

One issue related to this way of setting up the problem of causation is
that it is unclear whether the success of the Second Analogy is supposed
to show that no alteration takes place except as the result of *some*
cause, or that no alteration takes place except as the result of the
*same type* of cause. The phrasing of the principle supports only the
first, weaker reading, but lawful causation is often taken to require
that the same type of cause always yields the same type of effect
(e.g. fire causes heat).

A further issue is whether the argument Kant presents for the causal
principle ends up being one that engages in any way with Hume's
skeptical position concerning causation. Recall that according to Hume
we have no impression of necessary connection, and so there cannot be
any legitimacy to the use of the concept of necessary connection in our
experience of objects. For Hume, casual judgments are the result of
being habituated to expect the occurrence of one event given the
occurrence of another (e.g. to expect that heat will accompany fire).

### The Argument

Much of Kant's argument in the Second Analogy proceeds by way of the
following starting point or assumption: We are able to represent (and
ultimately come to know) the difference between the subjective
succession or simultaneity of our own states, and the objective
succession or simultaneity of states in an object. How is this so much
as possible?

Understanding Kant's argument in this way suggests that he is engaged in
a manner of argumentation that we've termed a "transcendental" argument.
That is, an argument that starts from an assumption concerning some
actual phenomenon and regresses to the conditions of that actual
phenomenon's possibility. Kant provides two examples to motivate this
assumption, that of the visual experience of (the parts of) a house, and
the experience of a ship moving downriver. We distinguish the
representation of a persisting object, such as a house, from a series of
events, such as a ship moving downriver. But in both cases there is no
difference subjectively in what occurs (at least at a certain level of
abstraction), namely a succession of subjective perceptions. As Kant
says,

> The apprehension of the manifold of appearance is always successive.
> The representations of the parts succeed one another. Whether they
> also succeed in the object is a second point for reflection, which is
> not contained in the first (B234)

So how is it that we can distinguish in the ship case that we have an
objective *succession* of events, while in the house case we have
objective *simultaneity*---one persisting object, whose parts
(e.g. roof, walls, windows, etc.) we perceive successively but are in
fact simultaneous?

Kant rules out several possibilities. We can't distinguish objective
succession from objective simultaneity by the intuition or perception of
any necessary connection because (and here Kant agrees with Hume)
experience "to be sure tells us what is, but not that it must
necessarily be so and not otherwise" (B3). Second, the supposed
irreversibility of our perception of successive events (such as with the
riverboat case) cannot tell us anything because one can only be aware of
the relevant contrast between 'reversible' and 'irreversible'
perceptions if one is *already* aware that there is an irreversible
order (e.g. that B's following A and not vice versa) to what one is
perceiving, such that one's perceptions must be in accord with it.
Third, one cannot appeal to some independently perceivable temporal
succession ('absolute' time), because Kant has already ruled out the
possibility of perceiving time itself (B 245). Fourth, one cannot appeal
to the perception of any mind-independent object (a 'thing in itself'),
since these too have been ruled out as wholly inaccessible to our
conscious awareness.

So Kant has issued a challenge: granted that a subject of experience has
a grasp of the distinction between objective succession of alterations
in an object (e.g. in the motion of a ship downstream) and the objective
simultaneity of the features of an object (e.g. the various features of
a house), what account for such awareness? This is a problem for the
Humean as well, since that view presupposes that we at least sometimes
make causal judgments based on a grasp of a determinate temporal
sequence (i.e. of some event B following event A).[^fn:2] Hence the
Humean account of habituation and causal judgment presupposes that we
can distinguish the objective sequence of events from our subjective
train of sense experiences.

Kant's claim then, is that it is only if there is a rule ordering our
representations, such that what makes it possible for us to grasp two
events as related by objective temporal succession is that one event
*caused* the other. Here is a reconstruction of the whole argument, as
articulated by Georges Dicker (Dicker (2004), 173).

1.  We cannot know by observation that an event---that is, a transition
    from a state A to a state B---is occurring by knowing that the
    perceptions of A and B occur in the order A, B; by knowing that the
    perceptions of A and B are irreversible; by knowing that A precedes
    B by reference to absolute time; or by knowing that these
    perceptions are of successive states of things-in-themselves.
2.  If (1), then the only way we can know by perception that an
    event---that is, a transition from a state A to a state B---is
    occurring is by knowing that B follows A according to a rule, that
    is, that the event has a cause.
3.  If the only way we can know by perception that an event---that is, a
    transition from a state A to a state B---is occurring is by knowing
    that B follows A according to a rule, that is, that the event has a
    cause, then any event such that we can know of its occurrence by
    perception must have a cause.
4.  ∴ Any event such that we can know of its occurrence by perception
    must have a cause.

Kant's conclusion here is limited in several ways. First, it concerns
only knowledge that empirical events have causes. It does not say, e.g.,
that similar events always have similar causes. Second, it presupposes
that we have knowledge of the objective succession of events. Third, it
presupposes that we correctly grasp the distinction between objective
succession and objective simultaneity. But, despite these
presuppositions, the argument seems an effective answer to the Humean,
for the Humean analysis of causation requires that we have a grasp of
objective succession (as well as the distinction between objective
simultaneity and succession), for this is used by the Humean to explain
how our associative powers get their grip on causal judgment. Hence,
while Kant's argument concerning causation may not be effective against
all comers, particularly against the skeptic who might deny that we have
any cognitive grasp of objective succession, it nevertheless seems
effective against Hume's argument.

## References {#references}

<div id="refs" class="references hanging-indent">
  <div></div>


<div id="ref-allison2004">
  <div></div>

Allison, Henry E. 2004. *Kant's Transcendental Idealism: Revised and
Enlarged*. New Haven: Yale University Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-bennett1966">
  <div></div>

Bennett, Jonathan. 1966. *Kant's Analytic*. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-buchdahl1969">
  <div></div>

Buchdahl, Gerd. 1969. *Metaphysics and the Philosophy of Science: The
Classical Origins, Descartes to Kant*. Cambridge: Belknap Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-callanan2008">
  <div></div>

Callanan, John J. 2008. "Kant on Analogy." *British Journal for the
History of Philosophy* 16 (4): 747--72.

</div>

<div id="ref-chignell2010b">
  <div></div>

Chignell, Andrew, and Derk Pereboom. 2010. "Kant's Theory of Causation
and Its Eighteenth-Century German Background." *The Philosophical
Review* 119 (4): 565.

</div>

<div id="ref-dicker2004">
  <div></div>

Dicker, Georges. 2004. *Kant's Theory of Knowledge : An Analytical
Introduction*. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-friedman1992a">
  <div></div>

Friedman, Michael. 1992a. "Causal Laws and the Foundations of Natural
Science." In *The Cambridge Companion to Kant*, edited by Paul Guyer,
161--99. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-friedman1992b">
  <div></div>

---------. 1992b. "Regulative and Constitutive." *The Southern Journal
of Philosophy* 30 (5): 73--102.
<https://search-proquest-com.libproxy.unl.edu/docview/1307508622/citation/903171E1E9CB458CPQ/9>.

</div>

<div id="ref-guyer1987">
  <div></div>

Guyer, Paul. 1987. *Kant and the Claims of Knowledge*. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-lovejoy1906">
  <div></div>

Lovejoy, Arthur O. 1906. "On Kant's Reply to Hume." *Archiv für
Geschichte der Philosophie* 19 (3): 380--408.

</div>

<div id="ref-strawson1966">
  <div></div>

Strawson, Peter Frederick. 1966. *The Bounds of Sense*. London:
Routledge.

</div>

<div id="ref-vancleve1973">
  <div></div>

Van Cleve, James. 1973. "Four Recent Interpretations of Kant's Second
Analogy." *Kant-Studien* 64 (1): 71--87.

</div>

<div id="ref-vancleve1999-ch9">
  <div></div>

---------. 1999. "Causation and the Second Analogy." In *Problems from
Kant*, 122--33. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-watkins2004">
  <div></div>

Watkins, Eric. 2004. "Kant's Model of Causality: Causal Powers, Laws,
and Kant's Reply to Hume." *Journal of the History of Philosophy* 42
(4): 449--88. <https://doi.org/10.1353/hph.2004.0081>.

</div>

<div id="ref-watkins2005">
  <div></div>

---------. 2005. *Kant and the Metaphysics of Causality*. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

</div>

<div id="ref-watkins2010">
  <div></div>

---------. 2010. "The System of Principles." In *The Cambridge Companion
to Kant and the Critique of Pure Reason*, edited by Paul Guyer, 151--67.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

</div>

</div>

[^fn:1]: See (Callanan 2008) for extensive discussion and citations.

[^fn:2]: Note that Kant's argument doesn't obviously affect a version of
    the Humean view that regards causal judgment as based on habituation
    due to there *being* a temporal order amongst our representations.
    Kant's argument only affects the more robust view that we must
    *represent* the temporal order amongst our representations for
    causal judgment to occur.
